Doc(eos_designs): How-to Guide - Node Types (#5885)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: docs/howto/node_types.md

> <!--

Reviewer: I don't see this file indexed in mkdocs. This also makes review a bit complex as it can only be discovered via search. Maybe I'm missing something, but it's certainly not in how-to guides.

Author: you are correct, I want to review with you and Julio on how/where to host these files before adding them to the navigation

  ~ Copyright (c) 2025 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

## Introduction to Node Types

> In Arista's AVD, a **Node Type** is a template that defines the behavior and configuration of a group of devices with a similar function. Instead of configuring every switch from scratch, you assign a `node_type` to it, and AVD applies a pre-defined set of design rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **Node Type** is a data model template that defines the behavior and configuration of a group of devices with a similar function. Instead of configuring every switch from scratch, you assign a `node_type` to it, and AVD applies a pre-defined set of design rules.
```

> The `eos_designs` role comes with built-in node types like `spine`, `l3leaf`, `l2leaf` and others. While these defaults cover most L3LS EVPN designs, AVD gives you the option to customize them or create your own.

Reviewer 2: If we are moving to more general speak , replace eos_designs with  AVD. I would also remove customize them as we would not customize the default/built-in node-types (could be wrong). I would update to "AVD gives you the option to create your own custom node types"

> The `eos_designs` role comes with built-in node types like `spine`, `l3leaf`, and `l2leaf`. While these defaults cover most L3LS EVPN designs, AVD gives you the flexibility to customize them or create your own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `eos_designs` role comes with built-in node types like `spine`, `l3leaf`, `l2leaf` and others. While these defaults cover most L3LS EVPN designs, AVD gives you the option to customize them or create your own.
```

## Default node types

Based on the Arista AVD `eos_designs` role and its various supported network topologies, here are the default node type keys organized by their primary design.

### Data Center/Campus L3LS (Leaf-Spine) Design

These are the most common node types for a standard datacenter fabric.

| Node Type Key | Primary Role / Function |
| --- | --- |
| `spine` | Core switch in a leaf-spine fabric, responsible for high-speed interconnects. |
| `l3spine` | A spine switch with additional L3 P2P links, often used for external connectivity. |
| `l2spine` | A spine switch used in a collapsed core or smaller fabric design. |
| `l3leaf` | Access switch providing both L2 and L3 services, acting as the gateway for endpoints. |

> | `l2leaf` | Access switch providing only L2 services, extending VLANs to an L3 leaf for routing. |

Reviewer: let's avoid "access" here. I immediately start thinking about distribution and core. =) Simply use "switch" without any prefix.

| `p` | **Provider**: A core router within the MPLS network, responsible for high-speed label switching. |
| `rr` | **Route Reflector**: A control-plane node that reflects BGP routes between PE routers. |

## Customize an Existing Node Type

All node type customizations are defined under the `node_type_keys` variable. Each key in this list represents a node type you want to define or override.

The most common use case is to override the default settings for a standard node type, like `l3leaf`.

Let's say you want to change the default BGP password and enable `bfd` on all your L3 leafs.

### Step 1: Define the Node Type Key

In your group variables (e.g., `group_vars/FABRIC.yml`), you define the `node_type_keys` and specify which node type you are customizing.

```yaml
node_type_keys:
  - key: l3leaf # (1)!
    type: l3leaf
```

1. This entry targets all devices where the 'type' is set to 'l3leaf'

### Step 2: Set Default Values for the Node Type

Under the same key, you can now define `defaults`. Any setting here will be applied to all nodes of this type.

```yaml
node_type_keys:

>   - key: l3leaf

Reviewer: I'd probably use some custom prefix here. I can only guess what kind of challenges we'll see in the field if we teach people to tweak build-in keys.

Reviewer 3: yes please only advice to set the `custom_node_type_keys`, which will be added to the default `node_type_keys`

          min_rx: 300
          multiplier: 3
      management_interface: Management1 # (4)!
```

1. Custom Settings for all l3leaf nodes
2. Set a default BGP password (using Ansible Vault is recommended)
3. Enable BFD on P2P uplinks
4. Set a default management interface

Any device in your inventory with `type: l3leaf` will now inherit these settings.

## Create a Custom Node Type

You can also create entirely new node types for specialized roles, such as a "firewall service leaf" or a "border leaf".

Let's create a `border_leaf` type that uses a different loopback VTEP IP range and has a unique MLAG configuration.

### Step 1: Define the New Node Type Key

Create a new entry under `node_type_keys`.

```yaml
node_type_keys:
  - key: border_leaf # (1)!
    type: border_leaf
    defaults:
      vtep_loopback: #(2)!
        ipv4_pool: 10.10.20.0/24
      mlag_ibgp_peering_vlan_pool: 10.10.30.0/24 # (3)!
      evpn_gateway: #(4)!
        enabled: false
```

1. Definition for our new 'border_leaf' node type
2. Use a dedicated loopback pool for VTEP IPs
3. Use a different VLAN pool for MLAG iBGP peering
4. Disable EVPN gateway features by default for this node type

> ### Step 2: Assign the Custom Node Type in Your Inventory

Reviewer: I'd also add at least on field example. That can be spine with services. Or leaf with EVPN server enabled - that can be border leaf or border leaf playing super spine role. Ping me if you need some real examples.

Now, in your inventory files (e.g., `host_vars/border-leaf-1a.yml`), you can assign this new type to your devices.

```yaml
type: border_leaf #(1)!
```

1. Assign our custom node type

The device `border-leaf-1a` will now be configured using the settings you defined for `border_leaf`, while other devices can continue to use the standard `l3leaf` or `spine` types.

## Per-Node Overrides

Even with defaults set at the node type level, you can still override any setting on a specific device.

For example, if one of your `l3leaf` devices needs a different BGP password, you can set it directly in the host's variables.

`host_vars/special-leaf.yml`

```yaml
type: l3leaf

bgp_password: "A_Different_Password_For_This_Host_Only"
```

1. This value will override the default set under node_type_keys

> This multi-layered approach---**global defaults -> node type defaults -> per-node specifics**---is what makes AVD so powerful for managing complex network configurations with minimal repetition.

Reviewer: This part looks quite confusing to me. I think we either need a very detailed example explaining all inventory details or simply skip it. Playing with hostvars is "dangerous" and I'd rather discuss this in a dedicated how-to guide.
